Warm greeting, friends. Warm greetings. Hello. Good to see you all again. Again, we'll just
take a moment, like usual, to reconnect with our motivation. So the reason we're here reflecting
on Dharma and trying to take this moment to pause and connect is really essentially trying
to reactivate our own goodness, our own strength and courage and clarity of vision, and also
with the goodness in other people. So that's Bodhichitta. Just try to shine that on right
now. We'll do that for a moment. And then also kind of reconnect with that kind of strong,
that certainty that everyone has this goodness and that things are fundamentally workable
and opportunities kind of in our favor to shine this beauty we have out more. So we'll just
do that for a moment. So I was talking with one of my awesome nephews yesterday. And we
came to the definitive conclusion that in all of existence, the entire universe, there are
only two things. Squirrels and not squirrels. This true? Okay, so it could sound odd, so
I'll repeat it again. The only things in the whole universe, squirrels and not squirrels.
Sounds funny. So maybe unless you're a squirrel, then it might sound very true. So okay, let's
cut it up in one different way. Clocks and not clocks. Is that true? The only things
that exist. It's true. Right? But is it helpful? So the Buddha was not saying just what's
true, but what's helpful? Because it sounds funny. Squirrels and not squirrels, right?
Like that's so ridiculous. Who would think of that? But don't we do that? Pleasure and
pain. Good and bad. Americans, non-Americans, Buddhists, non-Buddhists. Don't we do this?
And is it helpful? Right? So the big bedrock time, one thing we all can agree on, regardless
of squirrels or clocks or Americans or Buddhists, we all believe there's me and not me. No matter
where we're from, what language we speak, what time we live in, we really deep in our
very core. I definitely do. There's me and there's everything else. And that's how I
navigate every single moment of my life. And the Buddha asked us, is this helpful? Because
it is true. But does it have all the truth? We can cut up a pie of reality in the universe
in any varieties of ways. So say we want to get more sophisticated and say it's not me
and not not me. We can just break it down a little bit. It's me, not me, not both me
and not me, not neither me and not me. Right? Did the Buddha did that? Didn't the Buddha
have all kinds of boxes like this? Four noble truths. Isn't that a complete description
of reality? Suffering its cause, cessation of suffering in its cause. The three turnings
of the wheel of Dharma. The five aggregates and five elements. The five dhyana buddhas.
The three yanas. The one yana. These are all true boxes. They are all true things we could
believe in. And then the question is, is it helpful? And then the question becomes, is
it helpful for me right now? Because we're all going to assume the me, not me. That we
all share as sentient beings. As ridiculous as that is. And as functional as that is,
if I'm hungry, I feed food to myself. I don't throw it on the ground. It's very functional
to believe in me and not me. Poisonous and not poisonous. Healthy and unhealthy. These
are really important distinctions to make, but how helpful are they? And so the question
is not what box is right, but what box is helpful for me right now? And as we start
to look at that a little more and a little more, we kind of start to see that everyone
has this way of experiencing reality. There's me and not me. And so another way to say that
is me and the world. And the real practical thing to kind of swallow and really see as
a fundamental result of that way of framing experience is who is going to win the arm
wrestling match of me versus the world. I will always lose. How could I win that game? How
could anyone? It is a win-lose game. So one of the challenges the Buddha was saying is
one, look to ourselves, how are we cutting up reality? And is it helpful? And two, are
there other ways to step into reality, into boxes, to make distinctions, to understand
what's good and wrong right, you know, bad, good, helpful, unhelpful? Are there other
ways to do it that could actually include more of experience, more of the diversity
and the richness of life? And he asked us to look at that for ourselves. Because any
time we make a division and we say mine and not mine, in, out, then everything that's
on the outside, there's two ways of experiencing that. We build the wall, right? Outside is
either a threat or it's an opportunity. Is it a threat where we need to defend against
that at all costs because it's the bad guy or it's the enemy, it's the unknown? Or is
it an opportunity? It's the unknown. Wow, what's that like? How's that work? Is it a
threat or an opportunity? Because if we think everything outside of our box, whatever our
box is, it could be all men, all Buddhists, all sentient beings. There's a box and there's
different sizes and different textures and different varieties and different things that
they include and not. But any time we hold a box, we hold a system, we hold a frame,
we hold a context, we hold a container, there's something we leave out. And that thing we
leave out, is it scary and so we should defend against it or is it interesting and so we
should check it out a little more? And the Buddha said do both, right? The fundamental
takeaway of this, because everything is kind of distilled into these essential gems that
we're trying to like distill the essence of everything because we're so flooded with
information now, the fundamental takeaway of kind of what I'm throwing out there to
consider right now is a bedrock kind of question for our nundro practice is are we going to
choose how to experience our life? Are we going to let something else choose it for us? Because
if we don't take on when we have to frame experience, this is nundro time, then I stand
up and do my non-session time. That is a frame, it is a box. Meditation and post meditation
is a box. But does that box help me or not? Do I intentionally take on that box? I own
that, that frame, that distinction, that division. Do I really joyfully engage it? These are
my limits. This is what I'm working with. This is the game I'm playing right now. Soccer,
nundro, being a parent, eating dinner. These are all frames. When I'm in that frame, whatever
that frame is, because we're always framing our experience with a view. Does that frame
make me curious and open to more experience? Not just what's outside of the box, but what's
in the box? What does this taste like? What's my kid? What are they saying right now? Buddhism,
what's this? I've never looked at this part of Buddhism. Oh, non-Buddhism, what's that
other view? What do they say? How do they make sense of that? Do they think an enlightenment
exists? Is it true or not? Well, how does it work for them? We can either really intentionally
consciously engage how we frame our experience, we can choose it for ourselves, or we can
have it forced on us. The thing is, when we're little babies, and we're kids, and we're adults,
almost everything we experience, we don't get to choose, because we don't get to choose
who walks in the room and what they say. If we go to a restaurant, we don't get to choose
how the food tastes if we didn't cook it. We don't get to choose what the weather's going
to be like today. We don't get to choose the memory that's going to randomly pop into my
mind right now. We can choose, how are we going to frame it? How are we going to engage it?
With curiosity or with fear? It's the unknown. They're both unknown. I can cook the meal
or not cook the meal, and I really don't know how it's going to turn out until I taste it.
They're both unknown. But is it going to be an interesting, curious, heart-opening unknown?
Or is it going to be a contracting, shut down, tense, locked up, unknown? Is Nundro going
to be experienced as this giant burden that we have to plow through because that's what
a good Buddhist does? Right? There's times like that. Or is Nundro going to be experienced
as an adventure? Like, what is my mind doing right now? Like, I'm totally freaking out
doing these prostrations. I'm totally freaking out doing this mandala thing. Oh, I love this
Vajrasattva practice. Please, I want to do more of this. Oh, I hate this Vajra practice.
I can't even do another one because our mind's going to do all of this stuff because it's
energetic and we can't stop it. And why would we want to? It would be the end. No more
mind. No more me. Game over. And for some people, that would be a relief. No more suffering.
Game over. You know, there's a self. It's a problem. Why don't I just blow it up? Right?
A lot of us try that. There's another. It's a problem. Why don't I just blow it up? Or
avoid it. Or romanticize it. Or obsess about it. Or make this giant wall where it's held
in this very specific, suffocated, saran-wrapped way that it can't dynamically live and breathe
as an actual living thing. My practice. My mind. Myself. Because the thing is, is we're
making all these boundaries and divisions all the time. Me as a good person, me as a
bad person, me as a good practitioner, as a bad practitioner, as a brother, a son, a
daughter, a Buddhist, a non-Buddhist, a dancer, a writer. Is it helpful or not? Are we going
to use these divisions we make to foster more curiosity and include more of experience?
Are we going to choose to use frames, views, systems that cause us to open up and get really
fresh and engaged? Or are we going to just experience life as this thing we have to slug
through because it's brief, brutal, and short, and nasty, and like, please just let me get
through it and finally I can retire and then I can really do what I want. Finally I'll
get my nundra done, then I can do what I really want. Right? I only say this because I have
these things happen in my mind. I've done enough practice in a very short time to see
that my mind jumps around all the time and it can make something into a devil and it
can make something into a god and I deify and I demonize all the time. Do you do that?
Because if something is a demon, all bad, or a god, all good, and there's anything outside
of that, we lose that game. Because there's always going to be another, there's always
going to be an unknown that's not included and that is going to be unpredictable, uncertain,
uncontrollable and when it comes down to it, how are we going to react to the new thing
as a threat or as an opportunity? And that's what the beauty of being a human being is,
a sentient mind that actually has dynamic movement and is actually alive, a sentient
mind. We get stuck in these frames, these habits, these patterns, don't we? And like
Trump said, which is so powerful and impactful for me, it's like I'm going to paraphrase.
Unless you've really experienced heartbreak, your warriorship is untrustworthy. Unless we've
held on to something that we love, a frame of view, a person and experience, a sense
of self that we have cherished and cared for and after time, it broke. It changed. It left.
We lost it. Unless we experience heartbreak, the dissolving of that boundary, our warriorship,
our confidence, our courage, our bodhisattva motivation to really care for all beings genuinely
is untrustworthy. It's just talk. So when the boundaries we hold on to, some of them
are so loving and so important and so fundamentally good and valuable, like practicing the dharma.
If we get into a mood or a time, a phase, it could be minutes, it could be years where
it gets dry and stale and brittle and doesn't have vitality. It could be a session. It could
be longer. When our boundary gets hazy and all of a sudden we can't relate to it in the
same way, what do we do? Because that hazy, limbo, vulnerable, wounded, open, unknown,
bardo flex time, that is the right, rich time to open, to include more, to freshly live
in the gap of unprescribed, unscripted, unknown, now. Because we can't control it. And all
of a sudden our map, we lost our map. Because it broke. It was lost. That's the open time
for a practitioner to really have their heart come on, have their vision clarified, to have
their life light up. And so that's a path. Prepare, prepare, prepare, prepare, map, map,
map, map, map, map, map. Study, study, study. And what do we do after we study? Always we
poise, we release, we let go. Study and hone, samadhi, concentration, framing, then relax
and open and have insight and let vipashana happen. And patiently do it again and again
and again and again. Hold, release. Hold, release. So the question is, the thing we're holding
on to, the system, the thing we're concentrating on, the thing we're studying, are we doing
it with curiosity and entering in the unknown so that it's more enlivening, more courageous,
more caring, more authentic, more vulnerable, more me, more me as I really am, Buddha nature.
We hold that. And then we open and relax and release and let it do what it does. And our
frame opens and it gets bigger. And we include more people and more beings, more genuinely.
And we also love and include what we held inside more thoroughly. We love ourselves
more thoroughly. We love our system more thoroughly. We study Buddhism more thoroughly. We study
non-Buddhism more thoroughly, right? Because the whole thing isn't just to break through
all the frames and not ever really care for any of it. It's to really embody and inhabit
where we're at and how we frame and keep opening and keep opening. That's the Dharma path. And
there's a million ways that we're going to freeze those frames. And there's a million
ways that we're going to get hurt and not be ready to deal with that hurt. And so we
need to stay in our system, stay in our body, stay in our experience, stay in our study,
and really nourish that system so that we can grow into that open, aha, teachable moment
where a Vajramaster or a teacher can just tap that armor we always hold, that frame
that we love and that tap, tap, tap. And then there's the weakness in the armor. And instead
of contracting and freezing and gripping with deathly fear and terror, we open and relax
into the break and let that vulnerability fully allow our Buddha nature to come through.
So I think that's the path. It can be summed up as squirrels and not squirrels. But is
it helpful to do it that way? Buddhist and not Buddhist? Beginning and not beginning?
Enlightenment and not enlightenment? We need to make these divisions, but we need to really
be aware of when we do them, it's just a temporary working model. The only purpose it has is
to undo itself to make a better temporary working model so that again, we can relax
and open and let the dissolution, the dissolving, the flex flow, kind of more wiggly, unknown
opportunity, live with like really much more vibrant, dynamic energy of our own awareness.
So when a teacher does that, it's called provocation. Ding, ding, ding. Tap, tap, tap on the frames
we love and cherish. And all of a sudden, there's a, huh? Wait, what? Can we open and
relax or wall off? And then even more deeply, the question, when someone we don't know shows
up, ting, ting, ting. And all of a sudden, there's something we can't control. Do we
open and relax or do we tense up and fight? Is the unknown going to be an endless war
or an endless opportunity? And I really think the Dharma Path is offering a provocative
question for us to see how we're holding experience and really own it and see, is this how I want
to hold myself, my sense of me? And when that doesn't stick based on new information, new
experience, am I going to let myself open and be even more beautiful, more dynamic and
more curious? Or am I going to shut down and tense up? That's it? I say that as like let
your nundro opportunity only become the launch pad for the next very unexpected unknown window
of the next session. It's just going to keep provoking us. And hopefully we lean into that
as being a lojong mind training opportunity of relaxing further and learning more and
loving ourselves and others just more genuinely, like more real from our own side and not just
be a victim of this big experience that we can't control, but be like, I am a wounded
being. I have all these limitations and that's why I'm awesome because all those little wounds
and vulnerabilities, that's where my Buddha nature can open through and become even more
connected to other beings and more caring for their experience, the way they frame it,
the way they know it and they love it and they're scared of it. And all of a sudden
it's about me serving them and caring for them and listening to them and I show up to
them and my other awesome nephew, I asked him, oh, if you're in the lunchroom and there's
no one to sit with and you see a new person you've never seen before and you take the
brave move and you go up to them and if you can ask them one question, what's the question?
What's one of your favorite things? Because all of a sudden you're in their system and
they're just like in love with it and then you get to listen and get in love with it
too and all of a sudden it's you and them and it's not a fight, it's a partnership,
it's a friendship and the world becomes such a more beautiful, lovely place. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you very much.